Selecting whether a time series exhibits
additive or multiplicative behavior in
its terms relies on the analyst's
ability to see trend, seasonal and
error patterns.
While visualizing the data
doesn't seem very scientific,
it's one of the most effective ways
to determine how to apply a model.
The additive method is
useful when the trend and
seasonal variation are relatively
constant over time.
Whereas, the multiplicative method
is useful when the trend and
seasonal variation increases or
decreases in magnitude overtime.
Determining the method for
the trend component is a little easier
to spot than the seasonal factor.
With trend, we can see in our chart that
additive trends show a linear behavior,
while multiplicative exhibits
exponential behavior.
The seasonal component
can be a little tougher.
Let's use Bates Hotel
to better help explain.
If Bates Hotel where to increase its
bookings in January by 1,000 bookings
each year, then we would simply
add the 1,000 bookings or
use an additive method to account for
the fluctuation.
In Bates Hotel increases each
January at a rate of 50%,
that is increase by a factor of 1.5,
the seasonal component should be
applied with a multiplicative method.
Looking at the bookings time series
plot, or going back to our decomposition
plot, we see that the size of the
seasonal variations increases over time,
indicating multiplicative
versus constant variation,
which would indicate additive.